<appendix id='catalog.xml'>
<title>Format of <emphasis>catalog.xml</emphasis> file</title>
<para>

Catalog for Colorer Library resources is a convenient way to
centralize maintenance and development of all Colorer features.

This catalog is stored in <emphasis>catalog.xml</emphasis> file
and mapped into the ParserFactory class.

Catalog contains information about all installed HRC modules,
error logging configudation and listing of available HRD sets.

</para>
<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;" role='catalog'/>

<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;" role='hrc-sets'/>
<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;" role='hrd-sets'/>
<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;" role='hrd-entry'/>
<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;" role='location'/>

<x:schemaref uri="&catalogref;"/>

<para>
</para>
</appendix>

<appendix id='hrd'>
<title>Format of <emphasis>HRD</emphasis> color schemes</title>
<para>
<!-- todo mention HRD somewhere in introductionary chapter -->
<acronym role='Highlighting Resource Descriptions'>HRD</acronym>
files used to assign some editor-specific properties to each HRC Region.
Usually these include color and style information.
HRD file is a list of entries each describing one HRC Region.

</para>
<x:schemaref uri="&hrdxsd;" role='hrd'/>

<x:schemaref uri="&hrdxsd;" role='assign'/>

<para>
It is possible to maintain different HRD files for different languages,
or to compile them into one single HRD file.
The former allows you to distribute recommended settings with each language,
while the latter to unify modification and storage of changed HRD
settings within provided UI.

</para>
<x:schemaref uri="&hrdxsd;"/>

<para>
</para>
</appendix>

<appendix id='hrcxsd'>
<title>XML Schema for HRC Language</title>
<para>
This XML Schema was automatically generated
from the original <emphasis>hrc.xsd</emphasis> source, available at
<ulink url="http://colorer.sf.net/2003/hrc.xsd">http://colorer.sf.net/2003/hrc.xsd</ulink>.
All comments and documentation tags were stripped to achieve more compact format.
To use this schema for other than informational purposes use up-to-date
version available from the link above.
</para>

<x:schemaref role='' uri="&hrcxsd;"/>

</appendix>
